== Symptoms ==
Anxiety can be experienced with long, drawn out daily symptoms that reduce quality of life, known as chronic (or generalized) anxiety, or it can be experienced in short spurts with sporadic, stressful panic attacks, known as acute anxiety.  Symptoms of anxiety can range in number, intensity, and frequency, depending on the person. While almost everyone has experienced anxiety at some point in their lives, most do not develop long-term problems with anxiety.
Anxiety may cause psychiatric and physiological symptoms.The risk of anxiety leading to depression could possibly even lead to an individual harming themselves, which is why there are many 24-hour suicide prevention hotlines.The behavioral effects of anxiety may include withdrawal from situations which have provoked anxiety or negative feelings in the past. Other effects may include changes in sleeping patterns, changes in habits, increase or decrease in food intake, and increased motor tension (such as foot tapping).The emotional effects of anxiety may include ""feelings of apprehension or dread, trouble concentrating, feeling tense or jumpy, anticipating the worst, irritability, restlessness, watching (and waiting) for signs (and occurrences) of danger, and, feeling like your mind's gone blank"" as well as ""nightmares/bad dreams, obsessions about sensations, déjà vu, a trapped-in-your-mind feeling, and feeling like everything is scary.""The cognitive effects of anxiety may include thoughts about suspected dangers, such as fear of dying. ""You may ... fear that the chest pains are a deadly heart attack or that the shooting pains in your head are the result of a tumor or an aneurysm. You feel an intense fear when you think of dying, or you may think of it more often than normal, or can't get it out of your mind.""The physiological symptoms of anxiety may include:
Neurological, as headache, paresthesias, vertigo, or presyncope.
Digestive, as abdominal pain, nausea, diarrhea, indigestion, dry mouth, or bolus.
Respiratory, as shortness of breath or sighing breathing.
Cardiac, as palpitations, tachycardia, or chest pain.
Muscular, as fatigue, tremors, or tetany.
Cutaneous, as perspiration, or itchy skin.
Uro-genital, as frequent urination, urinary urgency, dyspareunia, or impotence.