== Signs and symptoms ==

Both mania and depression are characterized by disruptions in normal mood, psychomotor activity, circadian rhythm, and cognition. Mania can present with varying levels of mood disturbance, ranging from euphoria that is associated with ""classic mania"" to dysphoria and irritability. The core symptom of mania involves an increase in energy of psychomotor activity. Mania can also present with increased self-esteem or grandiosity, rapid speech, the subjective feeling of rapid thoughts, disinhibited social behavior, or impulsivity. Mania is distinguished from hypomania by length, as hypomania requires four consecutive days, and mania requires more than a week. Unlike mania, hypomania is not always associated with impaired functioning. The biological mechanisms responsible for switching from a manic or hypomanic episode to a depressive episode, or vice versa, remain poorly understood.


=== Manic episodes ===

Mania is a distinct period of at least one week of elevated or irritable mood, which can range from euphoria to delirium, and those experiencing hypomania or mania generally exhibit several of the following behaviors: speaking in a rapid, uninterruptible manner, decreased need for sleep, short attention span, racing thoughts, increased goal-oriented activities, agitation, or exhibition of behaviors characterized as impulsive or high-risk, such as hypersexuality or excessive spending. To meet the definition for a manic episode, these behaviors must impair the individual's ability to socialize or work. If untreated, a manic episode usually lasts three to six months.Manic individuals often have a history of substance abuse developed over years as a form of ""self-medication"". At the most extreme, a person in a full-blown manic state can experience psychosis: a break with reality, a state in which thinking is affected along with mood. They may feel unstoppable, or as if they have been ""chosen"" and are on a ""special mission"", or have other grandiose or delusional ideas. This may lead to violent behavior and, sometimes, hospitalization in an inpatient psychiatric hospital. The severity of manic symptoms can be measured by rating scales such as the Young Mania Rating Scale, though questions remain about the reliability of these scales.The onset of a manic or depressive episode is often foreshadowed by sleep disturbances. Mood changes, psychomotor and appetite changes, and an increase in anxiety can also occur up to three weeks before a manic episode develops.


=== Hypomanic episodes ===
Hypomania is the milder form of mania, defined as at least four days of the same criteria as mania, but which does not cause a significant decrease in the individual's ability to socialize or work, lacks psychotic features such as delusions or hallucinations, and does not require psychiatric hospitalization. Overall functioning may actually increase during episodes of hypomania and is thought to serve as a defense mechanism against depression by some. Hypomanic episodes rarely progress to full-blown manic episodes. Some people who experience hypomania show increased creativity while others are irritable or demonstrate poor judgment.
Hypomania may feel good to some persons who experience it, though most people who experience hypomania state that the stress of the experience is very painful. Bipolar people who experience hypomania, however, tend to forget the effects of their actions on those around them. Even when family and friends recognize mood swings, the individual will often deny that anything is wrong. What might be called a ""hypomanic event"", if not accompanied by depressive episodes, is often not deemed problematic, unless the mood changes are uncontrollable, or volatile. Most commonly, symptoms continue for a few weeks to a few months.


=== Depressive episodes ===

Symptoms of the depressive phase of bipolar disorder include persistent feelings of sadness, irritability or anger, loss of interest in previously enjoyed activities, excessive or inappropriate guilt, hopelessness, sleeping too much or not enough, changes in appetite and/or weight, fatigue, problems concentrating, self-loathing or feelings of worthlessness, and thoughts of death or suicide. In severe cases, the individual may develop symptoms of psychosis, a condition also known as severe bipolar disorder with psychotic features. These symptoms include delusions and hallucinations. A major depressive episode persists for at least two weeks, and may result in suicide if left untreated.The earlier the age of onset, the more likely the first few episodes are to be depressive. Since a diagnosis of bipolar disorder requires a manic or hypomanic episode, many affected individuals are initially misdiagnosed as having major depression and then incorrectly treated with prescribed antidepressants.