== Signs and symptoms ==

The signs and symptoms of brain tumors are broad. People with brain tumors will experience them no matter if the tumor is benign (not cancerous) or cancerous. Primary and secondary brain tumors present with similar symptoms, depending on the location, size, and rate of growth of the tumor. For example, larger tumors in the frontal lobe can cause changes in the ability to think. However, a smaller tumor in an area such as Wernicke's area (small area responsible for language comprehension) can result in a greater loss of function.


=== Headaches ===
Headaches as a result of raised intracranial pressure can be an early symptom of brain cancer. However, isolated headache without other symptoms is rarer, and other symptoms often occur before headaches become common. Certain warning signs for headache exist which make it more likely to be associated with brain cancer. These are as defined by the American Academy of Neurology: ""abnormal neurological examination, headache worsened by Valsalva maneuver, headache causing awakening from sleep, new headache in the older population, progressively worsening headache, atypical headache features, or patients who do not fulfill the strict definition of migraine"".


=== Location specific symptoms ===
The brain is divided into 4 lobes and each lobe or area has its own function. A tumor in any of these lobes may affect the area's performance. The location of the tumor is often linked to the symptoms experienced but each person may experience something different.
Frontal lobe tumors may contribute to poor reasoning, inappropriate social behavior, personality changes, poor planning, lower inhibition, and decreased production of speech (Broca's area).
Temporal lobe: Tumors in this lobe may contribute to poor memory, loss of hearing, difficulty in language comprehension (Wernicke's area).
Parietal lobe: Tumors here may result in poor interpretation of languages and difficulty speaking, difficulty writing, drawing, naming, and recognizing, and poor spatial and visual perception.
Occipital lobe: Damage to this lobe may result in poor or loss of vision.
Cerebellum: Tumors in this area may cause poor balance, muscle movement, and posture.
Brain stem: Tumors on this can cause seizures, induce endocrine problems, respiratory changes, visual changes, headaches and partial paralysis.


=== Behavior changes ===
Despite the personality and behavior changes that occur in people with brain tumors, little research on such changes has been done. A person's personality may be altered due to the tumor damaging lobes of the brain. Since the frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes control inhibition, emotions, mood, judgement, reasoning, and behavior, a primary or secondary tumor in that region can cause inappropriate social behavior, temper tantrums, laughing at things which merit no laughter, and even psychological symptoms such as depression and anxiety.Personality changes can have damaging effects such as unemployment, unstable relationships, and a lack of control.