== Signs and symptoms ==

Cirrhosis has many possible manifestations. These signs and symptoms may be either a direct result of the failure of liver cells, or secondary to the resultant portal hypertension. There are also some manifestations whose causes are nonspecific but which may occur in cirrhosis. Likewise, the absence of any signs does not rule out the possibility of cirrhosis. Cirrhosis of the liver is slow and gradual in its development. It is usually well advanced before its symptoms are noticeable enough to cause alarm. Weakness and loss of weight may be early symptoms.


=== Liver dysfunction ===
The following features are as a direct consequence of liver cells not functioning.

Spider angiomata or spider nevi are vascular lesions consisting of a central arteriole surrounded by many smaller vessels (hence the name ""spider"") and occur due to an increase in estradiol. One study found that spider angiomata occur in about 1/3 of cases.
Palmar erythema is a reddening of palms at the thenar and hypothenar eminences also as a result of increased estrogen.
Gynecomastia, or increase in breast gland size in men that is not cancerous, is caused by increased estradiol and can occur in up to 2/3 of patients. This is different from increase in breast fat in overweight people.
Hypogonadism, a decrease in male sex hormones may manifest as impotence, infertility, loss of sexual drive, and testicular atrophy, and can result from primary gonadal injury or suppression of hypothalamic/pituitary function. Hypogonadism is associated with cirrhosis due to alcoholism or hemochromatosis.
Liver size can be enlarged, normal, or shrunken in people with cirrhosis.
Ascites, accumulation of fluid in the peritoneal cavity (space in the abdomen), gives rise to ""flank dullness"". This may be visible as an increase in abdominal girth.
Fetor hepaticus is a musty breath odor resulting from increased dimethyl sulfide.
Jaundice, or icterus is yellow discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes, (with the white of the eye being especially noticeable) due to increased bilirubin (at least 2–3 mg/dl or 30 µmol/l). The urine may also appear dark.


=== Portal hypertension ===
Liver cirrhosis increases resistance to blood flow and leads to higher pressure in the portal venous system, resulting in portal hypertension. Effects of portal hypertension include:

Splenomegaly (increase in size of the spleen) is found in 35% to 50% of patients.
Esophageal varices result from collateral portal blood flow through vessels in the stomach and esophagus (a process called portacaval anastomosis). When these blood vessels become enlarged, they are called varices and are more likely to rupture. Variceal rupture often leads to severe bleeding, which can prove fatal.
Caput medusa are dilated periumbilical collateral veins due to portal hypertension. Blood from the portal venous system may be shunted through the periumbilical veins and ultimately to the abdominal wall veins, manifesting as a pattern that may resemble the head of Medusa.
Cruveilhier-Baumgarten bruit is a venous hum heard in the epigastric region (on examination by stethoscope) due to collateral connections forming between the portal system and the periumbilical veins as a result of portal hypertension.


=== Advanced disease ===
As the disease progresses, complications may develop. In some people, these may be the first signs of the disease.

Bruising and bleeding resulting from decreased production of coagulation factors.
Hepatic encephalopathy – the liver does not clear ammonia and related nitrogenous substances from the blood, which are carried to the brain, affecting cerebral functioning: neglect of personal appearance, unresponsiveness, forgetfulness, trouble concentrating, changes in sleep habits or psychosis may result. This can be seen on exam by asterixis, which is bilateral asynchronous flapping of outstretched, dorsiflexed hands seen in patients with hepatic encephalopathy.
Sensitivity to medication caused by decreased metabolism of the active compounds.
Acute kidney injury (particularly hepatorenal syndrome)