== Signs and symptoms ==
Symptoms can vary from person to person. Someone in early stage kidney disease may not feel sick or notice symptoms as they occur. When the kidneys fail to filter properly, waste accumulates in the blood and the body, a condition called azotemia. Very low levels of azotaemia may produce few, if any, symptoms. If the disease progresses, symptoms become noticeable (if the failure is of sufficient degree to cause symptoms). Kidney failure accompanied by noticeable symptoms is termed uraemia.Symptoms of kidney failure include the following:
High levels of urea in the blood, which can result in:
Vomiting or diarrhea (or both) may lead to dehydration
Nausea
Weight loss
Nocturnal urination (nocturia)
More frequent urination, or in greater amounts than usual, with pale urine
Less frequent urination, or in smaller amounts than usual, with dark coloured urine
Blood in the urine
Pressure, or difficulty urinating
Unusual amounts of urination, usually in large quantities
A buildup of phosphates in the blood that diseased kidneys cannot filter out may cause:
Itching
Bone damage
Nonunion in broken bones
Muscle cramps (caused by low levels of calcium which can be associated with hyperphosphatemia)
A buildup of potassium in the blood that diseased kidneys cannot filter out (called hyperkalemia) may cause:
Abnormal heart rhythms
Muscle paralysis
Failure of kidneys to remove excess fluid may cause:
Swelling of the hands, legs, ankles, feet, or face
Shortness of breath due to extra fluid on the lungs (may also be caused by anemia)
Polycystic kidney disease, which causes large, fluid-filled cysts on the kidneys and sometimes the liver, can cause:
Pain in the back or side
Healthy kidneys produce the hormone erythropoietin that stimulates the bone marrow to make oxygen-carrying red blood cells. As the kidneys fail, they produce less erythropoietin, resulting in decreased production of red blood cells to replace the natural breakdown of old red blood cells. As a result, the blood carries less hemoglobin, a condition known as anemia. This can result in:
Feeling tired or weak
Memory problems
Difficulty concentrating
Dizziness
Low blood pressure
Normally proteins are too large to pass through the kidneys. However they are able to pass through when the glomeruli are damaged. This does not cause symptoms until extensive kidney damage has occurred, after which symptoms include:
Foamy or bubbly urine
Swelling in the hands, feet, abdomen, and face
Other symptoms include:
Appetite loss, which may include a bad taste in the mouth
Difficulty sleeping
Darkening of the skin
Excess protein in the blood
With high doses of penicillin, people with kidney failure may experience seizures