== Signs and Symptoms ==
The signs of vertiginous epilepsy often occur without a change in the subject’s consciousness so that they are still aware while experiencing the symptoms. It is often described as a sudden onset of feeling like one is turning in one direction, typically lasting several seconds. Although subjects are aware during an episode, they often cannot remember specific details due to disorientation, discomfort, and/or partial cognitive impairment. This sensation of rotational movement in the visual and auditory planes is also known as a vertiginous aura (symptom), which can precede a seizure or may constitute a seizure itself.  Auras are a “portion of the seizure that occur before consciousness is lost and for which memory is retained afterwards.” Auras can be focused in different regions of the brain and can thus affect different functions. Some such symptoms that may accompany vertiginous epilepsy include:

Auditory hallucination
Cognitive impairment
Motor activity
Ictal behavior
Limbic aurasMany people tend to mistake dizziness as vertigo, and although they sound similar, dizziness is not considered a symptom of vertiginous epilepsy. Dizziness is the sensation of imbalance or floating, impending loss of consciousness, and/or confusion.   This is different from vertigo which is characterized by the illusion of rotational movement  caused by the “conflict between the signals sent to the brain by balance- and position-sensing systems of the body”.


== History and Epidemiology ==
Vertiginous epilepsy onset can happen between the ages of 4–50, although typically symptoms will begin occurring in adolescence or young adulthood.  Research studies have shown no inclination for this disease between sexes.

Caloric reflex testing was developed and used for testing vestibular function of deaf children and in diagnosis of childhood vertigo. A man named Barany (1902) published the first monograph on vestibular nystagmus that recognized the clinical usefulness of caloric responses. Barany's theory of production of the vestibulo-ocular reflex in caloric testing remains as the accepted explanation along with the description of nystagmus created by rotation in both adults and infants. Barany's work would later influence a researcher named Galebsky that would help him conclude that semicircular canals were functional at birth for both calorization and rotation.  His work would also confirm that the eyelid of a newborn is raised in response to a vestibular as well as an auditory stimulus.In the late 19th century and early 20th century, Hughlings Jackson  and W.R. Gowers  recognized that episodes of dizziness were a symptom of epilepsy.  During this time, when epileptic symptoms were brought to the forefront of study, there was no distinction between dizziness and vertigo.  Sir George Frederick (1868–1941), known for his work in pediatric rheumatoid arthritis referred to as Still’s disease, was the first to publish a description of episodic vertigo in children within the broad category of ‘headaches in children’ in 1924. Until recently, it was not widely recognized that episodes of suspected dizziness might be caused by epilepsy. 